Project proposal
================
omarxinyijohn

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(broom)
```

## 1. Introduction

The COVID-19 outbreak first reported in December, 2019 exploded into a
global pandemic within weeks and still continues its spread with new
waves of infections from new virus variants threatening regions across
the globe even as authorities work to increase vaccination availability
and roll out new mitigation measures. In the United States alone, more
than 700,000 people have lost their lives due to COVID-19, but the
vaccine has brought hope for a return to normal.

The main research question that we will be exploring for this project is
how cases and deaths have changed over time in the United States since
the COVID-19 pandemic began. We are using two data files for this
project, one of which includes cases and death data broken down by state
and date, and the other which includes vaccination data broken down by
state and date. Both data sources are publicly available on the CDC
website. Links can be found in the data section of this proposal. A
sampling of more specific questions include the following:

-   Are there any seasonal changes in cases/deaths?
-   How do changes differ across states?
-   Which vaccines were more popular in certain states (J&J, Pfizer,
    Moderna)?
-   Have vaccines reduced cases and/or deaths and if so, to what extent?

These are only some of our initial questions and we will likely try to
ask and answer many more questions about these two datasets as we
proceed through the project.

## 2. Data

We are utilising two datasets from the CDC website for this project. The
first one entitled United States COVID-19 Cases and Deaths by State over
Time reports aggregate counts of COVID-19 cases and death numbers daily
and are based on the most recent numbers reported by states,
territories, and other jurisdictions. The second dataset, COVID-19
Vaccinations in the United States, shows the overall US COVID-19 Vaccine
deliveries and administration data at national and jurisdiction level.

<https://data.cdc.gov/Case-Surveillance/United-States-COVID-19-Cases-and-Deaths-by-State-o/9mfq-cb36>

<https://data.cdc.gov/Vaccinations/COVID-19-Vaccinations-in-the-United-States-Jurisdi/unsk-b7fc>

## 3. Data analysis plan
